Eliseo Cisneros
Rebecca Troeger
ENGL 1007
March 30th

Interview Section 1 (Thomas Lemieux)

[Eliseo]
So, hello. My name is Eliseo and my research project focuses on the question, how do underground
music artists use digital tools and media to compete in the music industry?
Now, one of the reasons I chose this topic is I'm interested in music, especially underground
and the independent scenes. And what I find most interesting is how digital platforms
have changed the way artists have shared and promote their work, unlike older times where
you'd have to go through a major record labels and post it out to the internet and they'll
help you set up on TV advertisements and all that other stuff, right?
But like in today's modern world, musicians can create global audiences without relying
tightly on these major record labels or traditional distributions, which raises questions on independence
and competitions in the industry, right?
The resources I've read on this whole topic are from sources like Sounds of the Underground
by Stephan Graham and an article on Micro-Independent and Record Labels by Robert Stratchin, where
they have explained, right, digital tools for production and distributions have basically
transformed the whole music industry.
And I've seen examples from like other underground artists that I personally know, such as B-lo,
which is an underground music producer currently in the act of making online music and creating
creative online posts with his collective of other underground artists ranging from like
music, art, fashion, I believe.
And together, you know, all these sources I've read have suggested that underground artists
use digital platforms and DIY networks to build audiences and operate outside mainstream
industry structures.
So to understand how all this works, I'm going to speak to somebody involved in the music culture.

[Thomas]
Yo.

[Eliseo]
So Tom, could you please introduce yourself and describe your role in music?

[Thomas]
Hello, my name is Thomas Lemieux.
I am the guitarist for Jaded in Paradise.
And I've been in the scene for like, I don't know, like a year, during the old guitarists
left due to, I'll just say, personal reasons.
You know, after that, I pretty much picked up the mantle.
I learned all the songs that they had already done.
And the songs that they had done were definitely like, I would say, punk and like riot girl
inspired definitely.
That was the type of music they were making.
And I myself, I've written some songs myself, I've written, you know, some emo and some
like, kind of like hardcore kind of riffs in the meantime.
I don't really write the lyrics, I pretty much just write the guitar parts.
And I use Google Drive, actually, I post it to Google Drive as an easy way to share demos
among my bandmates so they can work on it, even though if we don't have practice, they
can come up with like a part or like lyrics or whatever.
And yeah, I think it's really cool.

[Eliseo]
So to your band, right?
What genre would you say like the whole band is a part of, right?

[Thomas]
I mean, I guess if you had to classify it would definitely just be like, pretty much
just like punk rock and like, kind of riot girl music.

[Eliseo]
And do you guys have any social media platforms right now?

[Thomas]
We do.
So we have an Instagram, we have a band Instagram that, you know, promotes our music and our
shows and, you know, just like photography that we may take or like art that like one
of the bandmates might make or other merch.

[Eliseo]
Is there like a certain person in control of the media or is the whole band in control?

[Thomas]
So we're kind of all in control of, you know, I guess the band's image and like what we
post and do, like there's no like a leader.
It's more of just like, we kind of give our input on what we should do and we make a decision
as a group.

[Eliseo]
Now how important are these platforms to your ability to reach like more listeners?
Like I know you've recently done shows.
So yeah, the platforms like do usually better than the shows or are the show shows you're
like your main growth?

[Thomas]
So yeah, yeah, for right now, our shows are like our main form of like exposure and you
know, I guess how people know us.
But yeah, right now I'd say Instagram was massively important for the band being able
to get exposure, especially at shows and just being able to promote ourselves.

[Eliseo]
And are you able to connect easier, like with your audiences through like these platforms?
Because I know in the shows, you know, there might be somebody that might reach out like
hold, when's your next show?

[Thomas]
Yeah, absolutely.
So there's been a lot of people, you know, especially recently, mainly because I know
what's going on because I'm in the band now, but you know, we've had people come up to
us after we play shows and be like, when's your next show?
You know, you know, do you have Instagram blah, blah, blah?
And it makes it really easy because we can be like, yeah, just follow us on Instagram
and we'll announce, you know, our next show or, you know, we have all our info up there.

[Eliseo]
So now I want to ask you something, right?
Because from one of these articles that I have read, they have mentioned how back then
like when you sign up to a music label or anything, right, you basically you get paid
and they promote your music, right?
However, the more as modern technology involved and people were able to do their own independent
like music labels, I guess you could call it, you know, funding became harder, right?
Now not to say like, you don't have to tell me any numbers or anything crazy, but do you
think it's possible to sustain a career in underground music today?

[Thomas]
Oh, that is a tough question.
It depends on whether if you go mainstream or not.
But I would say generally it is very hard to do a career in underground music, especially
these days because, you know, it's underground.
There isn't, you know, by design, I don't think there's a lot of money involved in underground
music, which I think is both a good and a bad thing.
I think it's a good thing because it breeds authenticity and people really only do underground
music if it's something they're very passionate about and they like.
But on the other hand, you know, you can't really do it as a normal job, you know, because
it just does not make enough or sometimes any money really.
So it's purely, you know, something you do just because you like it.
So I mean, we've made a little bit of money doing underground shows, but nothing substantial
so far.
You know, there have been a few bands that have blown up, you know, I guess turnstile
out of pocket, geese, I don't know, like those guys, you know, I guess they used to be in
the local scene and they kind of blew up and, you know, they've made careers out of it.
I kind of feel like that's kind of the exception these days because there isn't really a mainstream
audience for underground music anymore, which is another reason I don't think there's a
lot of money in it, especially with the rise of AI.
But anyways, I mean, I just don't think there's a lot of money in it anymore.
I know some bands who make decent money, I think, from doing music.
I mean, I know Brownie Points is on tour right now.
I think they do like OK on it, but I'm not sure.
Symposia, I think they do OK.
But a lot of the income these days that bands make is based off of merch sales.
I mean, yeah, sometimes like you get a cut at the door or whatever, but, you know, a
lot of venues are free these days, which I mean, it's again, it's a good and a bad thing,
more exposure, but make any money from it.
But most money, I think, comes from merch sales these days.

[Eliseo]
So. But in your own experience, what challenges do underground artists face when trying to
gain visibility?
Because I know there's also competition, even though it might not be like, oh, like this
is like competition as in like you're challenging all these other bands, but more like competition
as in if you're trying to get popular, of course, there's going to be more bands out
there that people might want to listen to.
And with all these underground being more accessible and music being more like accessible
to create, you know, what do you think underground artists usually face when like with challenges?

[Thomas]
Challenges, I'd say money is a big one.
Being able to fund good equipment or even any equipment, whether it be like mixers,
microphones, drum kits, guitars, basses, amplifiers, any of that gets expensive very,
very fast.
So I think there's kind of a high cost of entry into music right now, especially with
the stupid fucking tariffs that we have because of our president.
And, you know, just the general economic decline of the U.S.
right now, I think there's a high cost of entry into music production.

[Eliseo]
All right.
So now this interview is going to go to a close.
I'd like to thank you for taking a couple minutes of your time to talk to me.

[Thomas]
Yeah, no problem, man.

Interview Section 2 (B-Lo/Nigel, BK/Collective Director)

[Eliseo]
My name is Eliseo and my research project focuses on how do underground music artists
use digital tools and media to compete in the music industry, right?
So, one of the reasons I chose this topic is because of course, you know, I'm interested
in music, especially underground artists, like I range from a lot of metal, a lot of rock,
emo rock, rap, I come or I listen to like a wide variety of genres, right?
And you guys do fall under the underground artist genre.
Yep.
But one thing I find most interesting about underground artists and digital platforms
is how they are able to break out of being underground into the mainstream, right?
Without using big labels or anything, just purely digital tools and like their own record labels,
right?
Yeah.
So, I've read on sources and books like Sounds of the Underground by Stephan Graham, right?
And Robert Stratchans, he wrote an article on micro-independent record labels and they both
explain how basically underground artists and like small music groups are instead of relying
on record labels to get popularity and signing contracts that, you know, might put them in a
negative just to get popular, they're able to utilize platforms and tools such as Spotify,
Instagram, SoundCloud, et cetera, just to make an upbringing and get into mainstream.
And of course, yeah, I've used, of course, below music in my research, right?
Your newest song is an example, right?
And your guys post, I see you posting on Instagram.
Before we go further, I would need to know your guys' role in music, right?
Because just give me your artist name, right?
Are you a producer, label owner, et cetera?

[BK/Collective Director]
Um, I do a lot.
Let's see, I guess the best thing I could be put down is like a creative director and artist,
honestly, because I run the No Breaks page myself primarily and I do like most of our
campaigns as far as things with shows and releases for the different people apart,
just to kind of keep everything concise and give us a real image and then to really know
the algorithms. That's a main factor in everything that a lot of people don't really see or notice
because they think that when you're sitting and you're looking at a post on social media or on
Instagram that, oh, it just got big and it was overnight.
They built it based on a catalog of, oh, these buzzwords work, these colors work,
okay, these two things work in combination and this platform favors 30 second videos versus
this platform liking 15 second videos or like, for instance, a lot of people now understand
that YouTube's really meant for those 10 minute videos, 15 minute videos, not just your one minute
get ready with me and things like that.

[B-Lo/Nigel]
Yeah, so for me, my whole purpose, I feel like with music,
I want to make an impact on the people around me and the place that I grew up.
I feel like, for me, in the most humble way possible, I have so many different avenues of
where I can go musically and it's not just me saying that because I'm like an egoistic or
anything, like you guys have seen it in me growing up, like me playing my instrument,
me singing, rapping, like all these different phases and I've always felt like I've never had a real
outlet to become, like you said, that mainstream. A lot of people from Atlanta or Philly or
California, they have access to these things and these kind of opportunities because of where they
are. But growing up in Connecticut, who says anything about Connecticut? I want to make an
impact. I want to be the person to come home and my face is associated with music in the area,
but you know what I mean? I just want to make an impact for where I'm from, bro. It's bigger than
the music. It's bigger than me. Yeah.

[Eliseo]
You want to help these other underground artists?

[B-Lo/Nigel]
Everybody, man. Everybody. You don't have to be an underground artist. You could be any type of
musician. You could be an artist. I want to give a platform, man, because we don't have that. I want
to be the reason that people where I'm from can wake up and be like, let me chase this dream because
I feel like a lot of dreams get lost because of the lack of opportunity and I've seen it.

[Eliseo]
I love the fact that you keep to Connecticut, bro, because nobody talks about us. Everyone's
talking about Cali. Everyone's talking about New York. These are the hot spaces, but when it comes
to Connecticut, most people that talk about Connecticut want to go somewhere out of Connecticut,
right? To have opportunities, but trying to build something in Connecticut or especially
making Connecticut a place of opportunity, bro, that's big. That's huge. Now on to, I don't know
if you have ever looked into signing with major labels or ever thought about the opportunities,
but what do you think are the advantages of staying independent rather when working with
big people, right? Because like you said, you guys are all growing up collective here, right?
You guys are starting ground up going up, right? You're probably going to be able in the future
make big connections, right? But right now, you know, you aren't assigned to some big corporation
or big record label that's going to limit what you can do. You're basically free,
but what do you think the advantages are from staying independent right now,
rather than firstly signing up with like major labels or companies?

[B-Lo/Nigel]
Yeah, that's a good one. For me, I say one of the main advantages is creative control.
You know, I feel like I've heard a lot of instances where
artists have to shift their sound and their kind of image because their label wants them to be this
or their label sees them as this type of artist or this type of artist. So their creativity is often
limited, you know, especially when it comes to underground artists like Lil Uzi and the Sound
Cloud era. And like, you know, just there's multiple instances, whether it's in modern pop or like,
you know, Michael Jackson, 70s, 80s, 90s era, where they're trying to change
women because they want them to be a sex staple, all that kind of stuff. You know what I mean?
Like the whole, the whole idea of control is kind of attached to a lot of labels nowadays.
You can find multiple examples of artists staying independent and doing better than when they were
with a label, you know? And that's because they have creative control. That's all what
it boils down to at the end of the day. Music, art, art is solely creative. You know what I mean?
It's opinion-based and it's creative. That's why everybody can agree that AI music is terrible.
You feel what I'm saying? Like it's not, you can't replicate something specifically human and
specifically one person, you know? Like nobody can sound like me. I can't sound like my, like
Shoto. I can't sound like Lush. I can't sound like Elon. You know, all these people are, we're
independent because we have our own style and our own creativity. And when we put that together,
you know what I'm saying? It's magic.

[Eliseo]
Can I get your name one more time?

[BK/Collective Director]
Oh, BK.

[Eliseo]
BK? All right.
Yes. BK, right? Yes. Now since, you know, you're the director, the one in the control of the no
breaks page, right? I want to know more about digital platforms, right? Because you mentioned
these things like how YouTube considers longer videos, right? Then other things like probably
Instagram reels or TikTok probably wanting like 30 second, you know, things, right?

[BK/Collective Directo r]
Yes.

[Eliseo]
I wanted to see in your experience, right? What challenges have you experienced in the digital
section, right? Of trying to get no breaks out there, right? 

[BK/Collective Director]
With no breaks specifically, more so was the people. Because if you don't have a good ecosystem and a team that everyone
can step together on one accord, you won't be able to even make it to the media platforms. Because
in order for you to get everyone to click, everyone has to be listening to someone to kind
of get a general idea. And everyone has to kind of say, okay, I agree with that. And once you have
the team say, I agree with that, then you can start setting up, okay, what day is the good for
everyone for a shoot? Okay, this is the script for the shoot. How does this sound? Okay, you guys
like this? Okay, let's start getting some outfits together. What do you want to wear for this?
You want to kind of give your normal vibe? Do you want to give us very specific style? Do you want
everyone dressed up in the same brand? Give me ideas, things like that. Because once you've
put that all together, and you have good team members, you can create good quality work. And then
the algorithm will eat that up because one thing that will always do good is quality work, not
just rushing through things and trying to just get something out for the sake of having it out.

[Eliseo]
Yeah. So in your opinion, how do you guys think digital media will shape the future of
underground music? Because we already see like, you know, a bunch of these individual artists
have like, use it to create an upbringing for themselves. But do we think it would get more
like competitive as more underground artists like start coming onto the scene? Or who knows,
maybe there'll be more collectives like you guys where you'll end up bringing more people
up into more individual or independent creative space for people?

[B-Lo/Nigel]
I mean, it's really all about
the trends that people catch on to, you know what I'm saying? Digital media and social media,
all that all this is is like a platform to push trends. People listen to music because it's the
new trend. People follow creators because they're doing something different that they've never seen
before. And that's the new trend. And that's the new normal. That's the new good. You know what I
mean? Yeah. Me personally, I think very soon, social media will outweigh record label influence.
Oh, it already kind of does. You know what I mean? But it's still at a point where, you know,
if you get signed to Sony or you get signed to whatever, you know, it's still going to mean
like crazy something, you know what I mean? But within the last 10 to 15 years, we've seen more
and more independence in the music industry and people becoming just as mainstream as signed
artists because of social media. You know, so I feel like that influence is only going to increase,
you know, in the only way that it doesn't is if social media becomes something that's not a trend
within itself. You know what I mean? And that will be because of social media inevitably. Yeah.

[BK/Collective Director]
Yeah. You know, so at the end of the day, social media is king right now.
I put it like this, especially as an artist and someone who does things in the more literature
space in the behind the scenes area that it's really, or I guess the journalism area, it's more so
that every few years, there's a reset with a bunch of things trend wise and just how people feel.
And people often get caught up in trying to be the next big thing to the point that they revert
to something old, not understanding that's what they're doing. Yeah. And it's a more constant
trend. I feel like a good example of that is like the current trend with everyone doing a lot of
rage and noise pollution type beats and things like that where you can't really hear a lot of
what's going on or like with fashion in terms of everyone wanting to do the all black, but heads
are super colorful, really bright and maximalistic like accessories and things like that. These are
different areas where people are like, oh, I want to be so different. I want to be the next big thing.
I want to create a new trend. But all they're doing is taking something that is recycled of old
and giving it a slightly new modern twist with different proportions, sounds and things of that
nature. They're just kind of regurgitating the things that they grew up on with their own feelings
behind it. So there's never really anything that's truly new, but we just take inspiration from our,
you know, past.

[Eliseo]
Now, as we're getting to a close on the interview, I'd like you guys to let me know
what advice would you give new underground artists or maybe people trying to start collective
for BK? What advice would you give them, right?

[B-Lo/Nigel]
Keep going, bro. Keep going. There's days where
I'm so unmotivated and I'm looking at my page and I'm looking at my numbers and I'm like, bro,
am I really going to go somewhere with this? But then I drop a new post and within the
first hours, like almost a hundred likes on it already, you know what I mean? Like, and I'm under
a thousand followers, you know what I mean? I look at my numbers, I'm pulling in 40k views every month.
You know it? Like, and I'm doing numbers, bro. Like two months ago, I was at 830 followers
and I'm almost at 900 now. It's a grind, bro. It's going to suck, you know, to get better.
It sucks because it's so much time with being bad at something or acting like or being not acting
like being in the position where you don't know like what you're doing. Yeah. Because you have to
go through the trial and error. That process is not fun. And a lot of people get turned off by it
because they don't want to go through that.

[BK/Collective Director]
To add on that, especially in terms of like
creating groups and something I've learned personally as an artist, especially going more
into death with grabbing an audience, quality over quantity, always make sure whatever you're
doing, whether it's building a group, you don't need 30 people. Sometimes five is enough.
Whether you're an artist, you don't always need a shit ton of words. You don't always need a whole
lot of like extra things. Sometimes we have to cut back and realize that what you're doing,
you don't have to just put out a bunch of music. You don't have to just put out a bunch of videos.
Sometimes work on a song for a month if you really feel like you need to take that time.
Take three months to work on a film process to really make sure you write everything out and
it's shot properly. That will do you much better in gaining you the retention that you feel like
you deserve as a creative than you just throwing something there and then hoping something hits
the fan. And if it does, scrambling to recreate that same process, feeling an image all over again.

[Eliseo]
Well, this was a really nice interview. I had with you guys. Thank you. I could not thank you enough
for talking to me, right, giving me the chance to learn these new things because
I'm not gonna lie. I learned a lot, right? I learned a lot.

Works Cited:

Graham, Stephan. Sounds of the Underground: A Cultural, Political and Aesthetic Mapping of Underground and Fringe Music. University of Michigan Press, 2016.

Strachan, Robert. “Micro-Independent Record Labels in the UK: Discourse, DIY Cultural Production and the Music Industry.” European Journal of Cultural Studies, vol. 10, no. 2, 2007.

Lushsoma, and B-Lo. “Nina.” Spotify, independent release, 2026, https://open.spotify.com/track/7M9fXBspiWRDU5uqv3bi6t?si=511e87bc11f14b1f.